:github_url: https://github.com/PATRIC3/p3_docs/blob/master/docroot/news/2014/20140402-patric-april-2014-release-new-data-summary-and-special-collections-pages.rst


=========================================================================
PATRIC April 2014 Release: New Data Summary and Special Collections Pages
=========================================================================

.. feed-entry::
   :date: 2014-04-02

--------------

***Data Summary Pages***

You can now quickly access PATRIC data and analyses tools organized by
the *type* of data you’re most interested in.  Data Summary pages are
available under the Data tab in the main navigation along the top of the
PATRIC website.  Current Data Summary pages are for `Antibiotic
Resistance <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/AntibioticResistance>`__,
`Genomes <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/Genomes>`__,
`Genomic
Features <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/GenomicFeatures>`__,
`Pathways <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/Pathways>`__,
`Protein
Families <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/ProteinFamilies>`__,
`Specialty
Genes <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/SpecialtyGenes>`__, and
`Transcriptomics <http://patricbrc.org/portal/portal/patric/Transcriptomics>`__.

Each Data Summary contains descriptions and/or graphical displays of the
current data at PATRIC, specific data for selected genomes, related
tools and tutorials, and diagrams of how we curate, map and integrate
each data type at PATRIC.

--------------

***Special Data Collections Pages***

The Special Collections data pages highlight sets of data that
were generated to be used together to study a problem.  They may
include heterogeneous data (for example, RNA-Seq plus ChIP-Seq data) or
many instances of a single data type (for example, transcriptomics
across many conditions, genome sequences to study diversity or an
outbreak).  Many of the collections have been generated by NIAID-funded
projects to provide baseline data for further use by researchers.  
Where available, we include the results of the analysis across the
collection of data.

Special Collections are available under the Data tab in the main
navigation along the top of the PATRIC website and currently include: 
`PATRIC
Collaborations <https://www.patricbrc.org/webpage/website/data_collections/patric_collaborations.html>`__,
`PATRIC Driving Biological
Projects <https://www.patricbrc.org/webpage/website/data_collections/patric_dbps.html>`__ (DBPs), `NIAID
Clinical
Proteomics <https://www.patricbrc.org/webpage/website/data_collections/niaid_clinical_proteomics.html>`__,
`NIAID Genome
Sequencing <https://www.patricbrc.org/webpage/website/data_collections/niaid_genome_sequencing.html>`__,
`NIAID Structural
Genomics <https://www.patricbrc.org/webpage/website/data_collections/niaid_structural_genomics.html>`__, and
`NIAID Systems
Biology. <https://www.patricbrc.org/webpage/website/data_collections/niaid_systems_biology.html>`__
