
# PATRIC DBP - McClelland

As part of our Driving Biological Project we have concentrated on a relatively underappreciated area of high-throughput genomics, comprehensive fitness assays. As our model we have used Non-typhoidal Salmonellae (NTS), which cause ~1.4 million cases of food-borne diarrheal disease annually in the United States, and hundreds of millions of cases worldwide, that are associated with hundreds of thousands of death. Despite the importance of this food borne pathogen and over 30 years of intensive study, much of the biology of Salmonella in the various niches in their complete life cycle is still poorly understood.

The long-term goal of our work is to understand the molecular basis for the ability of NTS to survive outside hosts, to survive and persist in the intestinal tract of mammals and birds, and to cause systemic disease in some infected hosts. As part of our DBP we developed new methods for high-throughput screening of mutants and, as a model, we developed a 300,000 transposon insertion library in Typhimurium and have screened it for fitness in over 300 in vitro conditions. This data is [accessible here](http://brcdownloads.patricbrc.org/BRC_Mirrors/DBP/McClelland/)] along with the [sample metadata](http://brcdownloads.patricbrc.org/BRC_Mirrors/DBP/McClelland/mcclelland_selection_metadata.xlsx). We paired this fitness data with RNA-seq data obtained in the same growth media, at log phase and stationary phase, for selected conditions. [This data is used as an exemplar](http://rnaseq.pathogenportal.org/u/pathogen-portal/p/patric-example-data) for RNA Rocket, the Pathogen Portal expression data platform. The integration of fitness information with RNA-seq and other high-throughput data types has the potential to move forward the systems biology of organisms by, for example, identifying that subset of observations that are directly related to survival and those that are not.

Using targeted deletion libraries that we developed in combination with unique microarrays (Porwollik et al., 2014; Santiviago et al., 2009b), we have also screened libraries of targeted single gene deletions (SGD) and multi-gene deletions (MGD) in multiple animal models including those for Salmonella bacteremia, Salmonella enteritis, and subclinical colonization by Salmonella (Elfenbein et al., 2013b; Porwollik et al., 2014; Santiviago et al., 2009b). Systemic illness and bacteremia can result from infection with NTS. Children under the age of five are most frequently infected with diarrheal NTS (20% of isolations in the United States in 2005) and along with the elderly and immuno-compromised are at high risk for the development of fatal systemic salmonellosis after NTS infection. We used our collection of targeted deletion strains in Salmonella serotype Typhimurium (STm) and a novel microarray to identify systemic colonization in Salmonella-susceptible mouse models (Santiviago et al., 2009b). In addition to the re-identification of known genes, we have also identified mutants in ~56 genes including six small RNA (sRNA) genes whose altered fitness during systemic infection is a novel finding. We have confirmed the phenotypes of 13 of the 19 mutants tested. These genes encode a supernumerary tRNA (leuX), three sRNAs (sroA, istR, and oxyS), 4 putative membrane proteins (STM1131, STM2215, STM2303, STM2120), 4 genes of unknown function (STM3120, STM3121, STM731, and STM1760) and TatC (STM3975, a critical component of the twin arginine transport system for the transport of folded proteins across the inner membrane (Santiviago et al., 2009a). We have returned an intact copy of the appropriate gene to seven of these mutants, in STM2215, STM2303, STM3120, STM3121, STM3975, istR, and leuX observed restored colonization of the spleen in all cases (Elfenbein et al., 2013b; Santiviago et al., 2009b) (Guo et al, unpublished results). We have further described the functions of two of these loci, one encoding the Twin Arginine Transport system (TAT) (Reynolds et al., 2011; Weatherspoon-Griffin et al., 2011), and the other encoding a phosphoidesterase of c-di-GMP (STM2215)  (Zheng et al., 2013).

We are also interested in how Salmonellae are able to initially colonize the intestinal tract, a niche where sv. Typhimurium induces a strong neutrophilic inflammatory response. In the face of this inflammatory response the numbers of serotype Typhimurium (STm) in the intestine increase sharply, while the intestinal microflora of the host are dramatically reduced. We have screened the same SGD library to identify the bacterial factors that allow STm colonize the intestinal tract, using the calf ligated ileal loop model of infection (Elfenbein et al., 2013a). We have identified a group of >50 mutants that are selected against in this niche, over 30 of which are in genes not previously known to be needed during colonization of the intestine (Elfenbein et al., 2013a). We have further studied three genes that have emerged from this study, STM3846 encoding a putative reverse transcriptase (Elfenbein et al., 2013a), as well as a putative lipoprotein (Endicott-Yazdani, et al, in preparation) and a putative regulator (Elfenbein et al, in preparation).

Very few genes have been previously identified that are necessary for colonization and persistence in the intestine in poultry. We developed a chick model for subclinical Salmonella colonization in my laboratory, and refined this model to hatch our own chicks, infect them at 4 days of age, and follow these infections over prolonged periods of time. We have screened our multi-gene deletion library in 4-day old chicks for mutants that are less fit in the intestine and in lymphoid tissue associated with the intestine to 12 days post inoculation, and a secondary screen of individual deletions identified mutants in 21 genes as candidates under selection in the chick. Of these, we selected 9 for confirmation by competitive infection. We were able to confirm colonization defects during competitive infection for mutants in 6 genes, and we all of these genes were linked directly to the observed phenotypes by complementation analysis (Yang et al, in preparation). In future studies we will work to identify the molecular role of these genes during infection.

## REFERENCES

Elfenbein, D.M., Scarborough, J.E., Speicher, P.J., and Scheri, R.P. (2013a). Comparison of laparoscopic versus open adrenalectomy: results from American College of Surgeons-National Surgery Quality Improvement Project. J Surg Res 184, 216-220.

Elfenbein, J.R., Endicott-Yazdani, T., Porwollik, S., Bogomolnaya, L.M., Cheng, P., Guo, J., Zheng, Y., Yang, H.J., Talamantes, M., Shields, C., et al. (2013b). Novel determinants of intestinal colonization of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium identified in bovine enteric infection. Infect Immun.

Porwollik, S., Santiviago, C., Cheng, P., Long, F., Desai, P.T., Fredlund, J., Srikumar, S., Silva, C.A., Chu, W., Chen, X., et al. (2014). Defined single-gene and multi-gene deletion mutant collections in Slamonella enterica sv. Typhimurium PLoS ONE Accepted.

Reynolds, M.M., Bogomolnaya, L., Guo, J., Aldrich, L., Bokhari, D., Santiviago, C.A., McClelland, M., and Andrews-Polymenis, H. (2011). Abrogation of the twin arginine transport system in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium leads to colonization defects during infection. PLoS ONE 6, e15800.

Santiviago, C., Reynolds, M.M., Porwollik, S., Choi, S.H., Long, F., Andrews-Polymenis, H., and McClelland, M. (2009a). Array-based analysis of pools of Salmonella targeted deletion mutants identifies novel genes under selection during infection. PLoS Pathog 5, e1000477.

Santiviago, C.A., Reynolds, M.M., Porwollik, S., Choi, S.H., Long, F., Andrews-Polymenis, H.L., and McClelland, M. (2009b). Analysis of pools of targeted Salmonella deletion mutants identifies novel genes affecting fitness during competitive infection in mice. PLoS Pathog 5, e1000477.

Weatherspoon-Griffin, N., Zhao, G., Kong, W., Kong, Y., Morigen, Andrews-Polymenis, H., McClelland, M., and Shi, Y. (2011). The CpxR/CpxA two-component system up-regulates two Tat-dependent peptidoglycan amidases to confer bacterial resistance to antimicrobial peptide. J Biol Chem 286, 5529-5539.

Zheng, Y., Sambou, T., Bogomolnaya, L.M., Cirillo, J.D., McClelland, M., and Andrews-Polymenis, H. (2013). The EAL domain containing protein STM2215 (rtn) is needed during Salmonella infection and has cyclic di-GMP phosphodiesterase activity. Mol Microbiol 89, 403-419.
