=====================================================================================================
PATRIC March 2015 Release Features Genome Assembly and Annotation Services and over 6,000 New Genomes
=====================================================================================================

:Author: patricwpadmin
:Date:   2015-03-27T14:16:19+00:00

This March Release begins the first stage of integration of new and
updated analysis services in PATRIC, including addition of a new Genome
Assembly Service, Genome Annotation Service, Differential Expression
Service and enhanced Workspace to facilitate use of these services.

**NOTE: You must have a PATRIC user account and be logged in to use the
services and workspace.**

**Genome Assembly Service:**

The new Genome Assembly Service can be used to perform an automated
genome assembly using the latest computational tools. Single or multiple
assemblers can be invoked to compare results. The assembly service
attempts to select the best assembly, i.e. assembly with the smallest
number of contigs and the longest average contig length. Several
assembly workflows or “recipes” are available. These workflows have been
tuned and tested to fit certain data types or desired analysis criteria
such as throughput or rigor. The assembly service’s flexible nature also
enables the rapid design and emulation of other popular protocols. The
PATRIC Genome Assembly Service can be accessed at
https://www.patricbrc.org/app/Assembly.

**Genome Annotation Service:**

The new Genome Annotation Service utilizes the RAST tool kit (RASTtk), a
modular version of RAST that enables researchers to build custom
annotation pipelines. The original RAST (Rapid Annotation using
Subsystem Technology) annotation engine was built to annotate bacterial
and archaeal genomes. It works by offering a standard software pipeline
for identifying genomic features (i.e., protein-encoding genes and RNA)
and annotating their functions. RASTtk extends RAST by offering a choice
of tools for identifying and annotating genomic features as well as the
ability to add custom features to an annotation job. RASTtk also
accommodates the batch submission of genomes and the ability to
customize annotation protocols for batch submissions. The batch
submission interface will be made available in PATRIC in future release.
The PATRIC Genome Annotation Service can be accessed at
https://www.patricbrc.org/app/Assembly.

**Differential Expression Service:**

As part of the workspace upgrade, we have migrated the functionality to
upload and transform expression data to a service, named “Differential
Expression Service”. This service allows users to upload differential
expression data into their private workspace and compare it with other
expression data available in PATRIC. The service supports gene
expression, protein expression, and phenotype array data in the form of
log ratios, generated by comparing samples, conditions, or time points.
The PATRIC Differential Expression Service can be accessed at
https://www.patricbrc.org/app/Expression.

**Enhanced Workspace:**

We have implemented an enhanced workspace in PATRIC to support the new
genome assembly and annotation services. The workspace now allows users
to upload their data files (e.g., sequence reads, assembled genomes,
etc.), run the desired analysis services, store the resulting output
files, and download the results. It also provides basic tools for
organizing and managing files in the workspace. The Workspace can be
accessed at https://www.patricbrc.org/login. An overview of the
workspace is available at \ `Workspace User
Guide <../faqs/workspace-faqs/>`__.

**Antimicrobial Resistance and other Clinical Metadata:**

Included in this release are 3085 *Streptococcus* genomes that we
collected from the Sanger Welcome Trust. These genomes were part of a
study from the Maela refugee camp in Thailand that analyzed the specific
SNP patterns associated with B-lactam resistance
(`PMC4125147 <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4125147/>`__,
`PMC3970364 <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3970364/>`__).
This data set is particularly special because the genomes are split
roughly 50/50 B-lactam resistant vs. B-lactam susceptible so it is the
largest data set that we have for studying different machine learning
algorithms for AMR classification.

The release also includes curated AMR metadata for 595 genomes from the
TB-ARC MRC SA Initiative, Broad Institute (broadinstitute.org). For this
metadata, we assigned ‘Susceptible,’ ‘Resistant,’ or ‘Intermediate’
values to the Antimicrobial Resistance field based on values obtained
from AMR panel data or phenotype information, as indicated Antimicrobial
Resistance Evidence field. The AMR panel data and additional metadata
are available for download from the PATRIC FTP site.

**Changes to the FTP site:**

We have completed reorganization and updating of the PATRIC FTP site. It
now contains downloadable updated FTP files for all genomes and genome
annotations.

**New Genomes and Annotations:**

In this release, at total of 6178 new bacterial genomes have been added
to PATRIC. Out of these, 3039 genomes were collected from NCBI GenBank.
3085 *Streptococcus* genomes were collected from the Sanger Welcome
Trust, 110 *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* genomes were gathered from NCBI
SRA database, and additional 12 genomes were provided by PATRIC
users/collaborators, which are not publicly available elsewhere. This
release also includes 38 additional archaea genomes.
