:github_url: https://github.com/PATRIC3/p3_docs/blob/master/docroot/news/2015/20150331-4433.rst

===============================================
PATRIC/RAST Tutorial Workshop, June 15-17, 2015
===============================================

.. feed-entry::
   :date: 2015-03-31

The RAST/PATRIC teams will be offering a tutorial on June 15-17 2015 at
Argonne National Laboratory in the suburbs of Chicago IL. The workshop
will run for three days with the third day optional and devoted solely
to participants working on their own problems with help from the
RAST/PATRIC team members. The tutorial will cover how to assemble a
genome from reads, annotate the genome, perform comparative analysis
using genomes maintained in the PATRIC collections with tools available
on the PATRIC web site, and offering an introduction to the construction
of metabolic models.

`Click here for the proposed Workshop
Agenda. <http://rast.nmpdr.org/Html/RAST-PATRIC_Wkshp_Agenda.html>`__

The workshop will be limited to 20 people on a first-come, first-served
basis. While there is no fee for the workshop, participants are
responsible for their own travel expenses. If you wish to participate,
we encourage you to respond quickly to India Gordon
at \ rast-workshop@mcs.anl.gov.

NOTE: All workshop attendees must also separately fill out the “Argonne
Visitor Request” form
at \ https://webapps.anl.gov/registration/visitors/\ as soon as possible
— but especially non-U.S. Citizens, since they will take additional time
to be cleared. Please enter \ *igordon@anl.gov* as your “Sponsor’s
e-mail address.”
